>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>And I think many
people today don't
know what to believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>I felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
One of the things
that I truly enjoy
about this program, the topics,
the subject matter, and very
special guests who bring us just
some riveting programming that
makes you just sit
back and think.
And we have that
with Olav Phillips.
He's a conspiracy researcher.
And we're going to be talking
about a topic tonight that
is dear to my heart, mysterious
and lost civilization.
Olav, welcome to
"Beyond Belief."
>>OLAV PHILLIPS: Well,
thanks for having me.
>>NOORY: This is exciting
work that you do.
How did you get
involved in all of this?
>>PHILLIPS: I researched
things, and one day I
was doing some research, and
I came across a reference
to something called
the East Bay Wall.
And the East Bay Wall is
not far from where I live.
I've lived in the Bay
Area for most of my life.
And I'd never heard of it.
And I thought to myself, well,
I've never heard of this.
It seems to be a big deal.
So I've got to
figure what it is.
So I started to do
research about it.
>>NOORY: And you did
a lot of research.
>>PHILLIPS: I did
And some of it, there are things
about it that are exciting,
and there things about
it that bother me.
>>NOORY: Now, tell us a little
bit about what this area is
and what you were
able to discover.
>>PHILLIPS: Sure.
So the initial thing
that I figured out
was that there's a wall
that runs roughly from San
Jose to the Carquinez Strait.
It's been reported on a
few times, but not really.
>>NOORY: Like the Great Wall
of China, that kind of thing?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, kind of.
In most places, it's about
three to four feet high.
It's about a foot across.
And then we found out later it
runs about three to four feet
deep into the dirt.
It's pretty old.
And nobody knows
where it came from.
Conventionally, people think
that an Amish farmer built it,
that, I don't know.
They can't figure
how who built it.
[LAUGHS]
And the nature of that mystery
is what attracted me to it.
People had talked
about it now and again.
But I had never heard
of it, so, you know.
>>NOORY: What kind of material?
>>PHILLIPS: It's loose rock.
The rocks are about
this big in size,
and they're just basically
stacked together into a wall.
>>NOORY: And what
are the dimensions?
>>PHILLIPS: In most places it's
about three to four feet high
and about a foot across.
But in some places it can
go up to seven feet high.
And we've discovered
that it does indeed--
>>NOORY: And how long?
>>PHILLIPS: The initial
chunk was about 50 miles.
>>NOORY: 50 miles?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, and
it's broken in places.
>>NOORY: What were they
trying to keep out?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, that's
one of the big questions.
The whole wall thing excited me.
I mean, I studied archaeology.
I studied anthropology
when I was in school.
And so mysterious old
things, I like that.
But nobody had
ever done any kind
of archaeological research,
and that bothered me,
that we have this wall
that nobody in the Bay Area
has ever heard of.
Its 50 miles long,
which is ridiculous.
And it just sits there.
Nobody knows why it
was built. Nobody
knows exactly who built it.
Nobody knows exactly
when built it,
because nobody ever dated it.
I mean, it just sat there.
Most people don't
even that it exists.
The Native Americans in our
area around the Bay Area,
they didn't build
monumental structures.
They didn't build structures
out of stone or out
of-- they lived in small kind
of movable houses, so to speak.
And they were quasi-nomadic.
So building a 50-mile
long wall is kind of
beyond what they would do.
>>NOORY: Some believe that
maybe the Spanish might
have built this?
>>PHILLIPS: The
Spanish, some people
talked about the Spanish.
The problem is that when the
Spanish arrived in our area,
they actually reported the
wall having already been there.
So they couldn't have
built it because--
>>NOORY: So it couldn't
have been them.
>>PHILLIPS: No.
See, this is where
it gets mysterious.
Well, if the Native
Americans didn't build it,
the Spanish didn't
build it, who did?
>>NOORY: Nobody takes claim.
>>PHILLIPS: Nobody
takes claim to it, no.
There is some weird-- as
you expand out from it,
you kind of jettison this
notion that there's one wall.
Once you start to look in
the entire environment of all
of northern California, then you
start to understand more things
about it.
And there are more
legends about the walls
and about the structures that
are associated with the walls.
The wall itself, yeah, no.
>>NOORY: I was going to say,
Olav, is it possible that there
are other things there
that may be buried?
>>PHILLIPS: It is possible.
As I said, no large-scale
archaeological expedition
has ever been carried out.
Recently I've been contacted
by some people that
are interested in possibly
doing that, possibly using
ground-penetrating radar
to see if there's actually
material below it.
>>NOORY: Right, like we find
at the pyramids, for example,
then realize there's
structure there.
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah,
I mean, if you have
a wall and somebody built it,
chances are they left garbage.
I mean, as humans, one
of the things we excel at
is leaving garbage everywhere.
So even in ancient
times, they would
leave shells, broken
tools, little bits
and pieces of stuff.
>>NOORY: Bodies.
>>PHILLIPS: Bodies, right, sure.
Hopefully there are no bodies.
>>NOORY: Could the wall be
older than people think?
I mean, you can't carbon
date it, unfortunately,
but maybe there's
things, like you just
said, in the area that
you might be able to.
>>PHILLIPS: Well, one of the
things that's interesting,
I've got a couple of
rough dates on it.
And one of the things
that was interesting
is that even without trying
to date it-- and yeah,
you can carbon date it--
is that there are stretches
of the wall where acorns
fell out of trees,
and the acorn opened, and the
tree actually grew out of it
and bifurcated the wall,
and now it's a huge tree.
So the time it takes
for that tree to grow
gives you some idea
of how old it is.
I was on a show, and they
did attempt to date it.
The date I got back, the
conservative estimate
is maybe 400 to 500 years,
anywhere from 300 to 500 years
old.
The more liberal estimate
is higher, is more than 700.
>>NOORY: And there's talk that
there's other walls around?
>>PHILLIPS: Correct.
So there's a wall that runs
from San Jose to the Carquinez
Strait.
There's another wall
that gets picked up
and it goes across
Marin out to Point Reyes
and then goes north.
So I started to
follow these walls,
and I came across some
research done by some others.
And it turns out there's a
whole bunch of walls scattered
all over northern California.
>>NOORY: Do you think, Olav,
there's some connection
between all these walls?
>>PHILLIPS: I do.
I think that it's a
large-scale lost civilization.
And one of the reasons being is
that the walls are constructed
in a very similar way.
You have a mountain, and
around of base of the mountain,
spreading out in a
circle, are more walls.
And the walls always go across
the tops of ridge lines.
And so in all these areas
in northern California
where we have exceedingly high
peaks like Shasta or the buttes
or in Mount Diablo, we have
walls associated with them.
Like Shasta has walls around it.
Mount Diablo has
walls around it.
So there's a kind
of structure to it
that seems to be consistent.
It also stops at Fresno.
It doesn't go any further
south than Fresno.
And as it goes in the extreme
northern part of the state,
they're more concentrated.
And as you go south,
they become more diffuse.
So it looks like
it was concentrated
in the northern part of the
state and along the coast.
>>NOORY: Maybe they had a bullet
train from LA to San Francisco
and this was the path.
>>PHILLIPS: I wish we could
find that bullet train.
It would make my life easier.
>>NOORY: What oes
your gut tell you
in terms of the
civilization involved
and the purpose of a wall.
I mean, because as
far as I'm concerned,
a wall is to keep
something out or in.
>>PHILLIPS: Right.
One of the things that
I find interesting
is that in doing the research,
I did a lot of research
into the Yurok.
And the Yurok are a
Native American group
that live in the northern
part of the state.
They actually have a legend
of what's called the Wagas.
And the Wagas were a
light-skinned people
that came to the
Yurok centuries,
centuries-- they talked about
it being 10,000 years ago
or something like that.
That's probably too much,
but many thousands of years
ago, these people came to
them and taught them things
and tried to help them
to learn how to fish,
to learn how to grow, to
learn how to build things.
And one day, these people left.
And they went back
up into the mountains
where they had come from
and to the north where
they had come down from.
And they said, we'll
be back some day.
Now, unfortunately
for the Yurok,
when European
settlers came, they
thought it was the Wagas,
which didn't turn out too well.
But
this kind of notion that there
was a preexisting group there,
that they came down out of the
mountains and from the north
and taught them things and then
decided they wanted to leave,
disappeared up into the
mountains and to the north,
well, that's where
we find this stuff.
We find this stuff in
mountains and to the north.
So that seems to be consistent.
What's odd is that
they're light-skinned,
kind of Anglofied people.
And that's strange, because
there shouldn't be any there.
>>NOORY: Where did they go?
>>PHILLIPS: Nobody knows.
They disappeared.
They built structures on top
of mountains in the area.
They told the Yurok to look
after these structures,
that one day they
would come back.
They left behind one
person who is a half Yurok.
half Wagas to care
for their deer
because they thought
that the deer were
kind of like their pets.
And they had a whole fairly
sophisticated trough system
set up to feed deer.
And eventually he
got tired of waiting,
and he told the people
that were helping them,
the Yurok, well, I'm
going to leave now.
I'm going to go back
to be with them.
So he disappeared.
He walked off into the forest
going north and he was gone.
>>NOORY: Far-out theory.
Extraterrestrials?
>>PHILLIPS: You know, I think
at this point anything's game.
I think that it's not the theory
that I would gravitate toward,
but in the absence of
any evidence at all,
I think it's worthwhile.
I mean, there are things out
there that do defy explanation.
And I think that
it as researchers,
that's one of the things
that disturbed me,
is that archaeologists
have never looked at it.
As researchers, you have
to have an open mind.
You have to look at
all the possibilities
and then figure out
what the right one is.
>>NOORY: Why haven't these
archaeologists jumped in there?
>>PHILLIPS: I think a lot of
it has to do with funding.
They go after things
that get them funding.
>>NOORY: And make money.
>>PHILLIPS: And make money.
I mean, the world
is turned by money.
And I think that archaeology
is run that way as well.
>>NOORY: There's always
been talk of giants
around Catalina Island.
And what about this area?
Wasn't there some kind
of discovery with bones
or something like that?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah,
there was, actually.
In Concord, California,
which is probably
maybe 20 miles
away from the wall,
they found an eight-foot
tall giant, a burial site
of an eight-foot tall giant.
And the Smithsonian--
usual story,
you've heard this before.
>>NOORY: Yes, I have.
>>PHILLIPS:
Smithsonian comes in.
They date it.
They say it's really old.
It's strange.
It has a lot of weird
grave goods around it.
Then they take it.
It's gone.
Can't find any record of it.
>>NOORY: Where do
they put these things?
>>PHILLIPS: Probably
in a vault somewhere.
>>NOORY: Down in the
basement in Washington, DC.
>>PHILLIPS: Down in the third
sub-basement, I would imagine.
>>NOORY: [INAUDIBLE] stuff.
How do you compare it to
the stories of Lemuria?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, I think if I
had to look at one explanation,
I think that Lemuria is
probably the most logical.
Because one of the
things that you see
is that Lamuria-- in case
the listeners don't know,
it's a kind of
parallel to Atlantis.
Lemuria exists in the Pacific.
Atlantis is in the Atlantic.
And Lemuria died in
an catastrophic event.
>>NOORY: Was it
an island nation?
>>PHILLIPS: It was
an island nation.
And they had connections
out through everywhere.
And one of the
persistent stories
is that when Lemuria
was destroyed,
however it was destroyed, the
survivors came to California.
That's why we see a
lot of weird things
here, Catalina, even
in the Mojave Desert.
Shasta was supposedly--
many people,
the Rosicrucians, for
example, believe the Lemurians
live in Mount Shasta.
So in California, we took
the survivors, so to speak.
But they also went down
into South America,
went down into Central
America, and they went up
into Oregon and Washington.
>>NOORY: Exactly where in the
Pacific might it have been?
>>PHILLIPS: It's hard to say.
Some people put it
in the Indian Ocean,
which I think is
a little too far.
Supposedly it was pretty close
to the center of the Pacific
Ocean.
>>NOORY: What is the Magna Bowl?
>>PHILLIPS: The Magna
Bowl is very interesting.
And it's actually
one of the reasons
why I believe in
things like Lemuria.
The Magna Bowl is a
bowl that's completely
covered in cuneiform,
Babylonian cuneiform.
So we're talking Iraq,
the Middle East, right?
So this bowl was discovered in
a place called Pumapunku, which
is in the Altiplano in Bolivia.
And nobody can explain how a
bowl that's dedicated to Ishtar
and was given two virgins
of the Ishtar cult
ended up in Bolivia.
>>NOORY: Just popped up?
>>PHILLIPS: Apparently
it just popped up.
Now, what makes more sense
is that you have something,
it had to get there somehow.
So somebody either had to
sail across the Pacific
from the Middle
East with this bowl,
and there's an accompanying
statute as well.
There's not just a bowl.
There's a statue, also
completely covered
in cuneiform.
And it can be translated.
It has been translated.
Now, if you've got this
bowl and this statute,
it gets there somehow.
Either somebody crossed the
Pacific Ocean with this thing,
or more likely they
went somewhere,
maybe they picked it
up as a tourist item
or they traded for it, whatever.
They end up with it
on a central location,
and then that same
person says, well, I'm
going to go over
here, and that happens
to be Bolivia and the Altiplano.
>>NOORY: This
entire case in terms
of your involvement in the
puzzlement of what it might be,
what does it tell you?
What's the central theme of
what might be going on here?
>>PHILLIPS: That our region
of the world, the west coast,
is a lot older and a lot
more visited than we think.
>>NOORY: Than we though.
It wasn't just Christopher
Columbus, was it?
>>PHILLIPS: No, no.
I mean, the Chinese came.
There's good evidence
the Chinese came.
There's evidence
that other people
came even older than that.
You've got this mysterious
lost civilization that exists.
You've got Babylonian
bowls appearing in Bolivia.
You've got other Middle Eastern
items that have shown up
along the central--
>>NOORY: Egyptian
hieroglyphs, right?
>>PHILLIPS: Egyptian
hieroglyphs in the Grand Canyon.
Supposedly there's an
Egyptian burial site
in the Grand Canyon.
This seems to indicate
that movement,
kind of pre-Columbian
movement, was
a lot more sophisticated than
what we were taught in school.
>>NOORY: I agree.
Put the mindset of
an ancient explorer.
You're looking out
over an ocean, one,
thinking you fall
off at the end.
What would possess them,
Olav, to get in a boat
and just keep sailing?
I mean, at some point because
of the vastness of the ocean,
they had to give up.
They'd say, what are we doing?
This is ridiculous.
I mean, one, they
didn't know that there
was a land in North America
or Central America or South
America.
They didn't know that
just by appearance.
It was trial and error,
I would assume, right?
>>PHILLIPS: I think the
central theme there,
if you want to put yourself in
that position, is at these guys
were adventurers, that when
Columbus did sail across,
that his crew became
very concerned that they
were going to fall off
the edge of the world.
The Vikings were the same way.
As the Vikings were sailing
across the North Atlantic
toward Greenland
and Iceland, they
thought that they were going
to die and never make it back.
What pushes them forward?
I think it's the adventure
of it, the conquest of it.
It's the same reason
we go into space.
It's the same reason that we
go down deep into the ocean.
We've got to see what's there.
And conventional
thought being, I'm
going to fall off the
edge of the world, that
will work for 80% of
the people in the world,
but there's always 10% or
20% of the people, that's
not good enough.
They literally have to fall
off the edge of the world.
They're not going to
believe that the fire is hot
until they touch it.
They're not going to
believe that they're
going to get electrocuted
by an electric fence
until they hold it.
They have to actually do it.
>>NOORY: What
perseverance, though,
to keep pushing and going.
I mean, I gotta
tell you, if I were
a sailor on a ship
traveling through the ocean,
seeing no land mass--
>>PHILLIPS: It's scary.
>>NOORY: And we're
talking, what, months?
>>PHILLIPS: Months.
It's scary.
>>NOORY: Yeah, you might
say, maybe we should go back.
>>PHILLIPS: Thor Heyerdahl
is a great example.
Thor Heyerdahl was
an anthropologist.
He wanted to prove that
the Egyptians could
have sailed across the ocean.
So he created Ra.
And the first Ra sank.
But he was daring
enough to say, I
want to prove that
this could work.
So he built a reed
ship, and he attempted
to sail across the ocean.
The second time, he made it.
Then after that, he said,
well, you know what?
Now I want to prove that the
Polynesians could have sailed--
>>NOORY: He did Kon-Tiki.
>>PHILLIPS: In Kon-Tiki.
What drove him to do it?
It was the daring-ness,
the adventure
of attempting to try to
prove that it was real
and the fearlessness of that.
And it takes those
kind of fearless people
to go into space, to
go deep into the ocean,
to try to go through
the rainforest
to find lost civilizations.
We have to have the--
>>NOORY: The drive?
>>PHILLIPS: The drive and
the heroic-ness to do it.
And sometimes I think
that that's lost today,
that we step back too far.
We send probes out into space
to see the rings of Saturn.
Really, I think as humans we
need to go see that ourselves.
>>NOORY: No doubt.
We're with Olav Phillips, of
course, conspiracy researcher.
And when they say
conspiracy researcher,
what do they mean by that?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, I like to do
research, and a lot of times
I end up doing research
about conspiracies.
>>NOORY: [LAUGHS]
>>PHILLIPS: So you know, the
thing about it is that much
like the wall and much like
those kinds of ancient--
>>NOORY: You like
adventure, don't you?
>>PHILLIPS: I like adventure,
and I like puzzles.
And these things
are all puzzles.
Who built that wall?
Why?
Who-- I don't know.
Well, the conspiracies, there's
a lot. [LAUGHS] Pick one.
But you know, who did it?
Why?
What was the motivation?
Everybody has a motivation
for what they do.
What was their motivation
in doing this thing?
>>NOORY: What is your
favorite conspiracy, Olav?
>>PHILLIPS: I like the
secretive space program.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>PHILLIPS: And I like
ancient mysteries.
>>NOORY: Do think there
is a secret space program?
>>PHILLIPS: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: It's been going
on for a long time.
>>PHILLIPS: Very long time.
>>NOORY: Do we have
bases on the moon,
on the other side, the
far side of the moon?
>>PHILLIPS: I think so.
>>NOORY: A lot of
people think that.
>>PHILLIPS: I think
I think that there
are bases on Venus and
on Mars and on the moon.
>>NOORY: What
makes you say that?
>>PHILLIPS: Well,
the Venus thing
is different, but on Mars, even
aside from the face on Mars
and the folis and the
pyramid and all that,
if you look at it, you can
actually find the buildings.
They're there.
You can't hide this stuff.
>>NOORY: Strange structures.
>>PHILLIPS: Strange
structures that
were built by human beings.
And they're there.
You just have to look.
On the moon, if you
look enough, you
can see the tracks
of the vehicles.
I mean, this stuff is there.
You just have to look.
>>NOORY: That our
astronauts didn't go to.
>>PHILLIPS: No.
>>NOORY: Something else.
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah.
It's all there.
You just have to look for it.
And I think much like the wall,
one of the things that happens
is that as humans,
we become complacent.
We get up, and we go to work,
and we come home from work.
And we don't really try
to understand things
beyond our immediate scope.
And so these things are
staring you right in the face,
but you don't see it, because
you don't want to see it
or you're not putting yourself
in a position to see it.
>>NOORY: What if we had advanced
ancient civilizations that
had capability-- we
see, for example,
in the old Sanskrits of India
flying machines, vermanas.
>>PHILLIPS: Vermanas, right.
>>NOORY: They were everywhere.
What if we had the capability
of going in the moon
with an advanced civilization
that somehow got blown up
or something happened to them
hundreds of millions of years
ago?
Is it conceivable that when
you talk about a secret space
program, we may also be talking
about planetary visitations,
going to the moon with
these ancients from a long,
long time ago?
>>PHILLIPS: Yes,
and I think things
like this, what we were
talking about before,
I think they play into it.
You look at some of these
structures that are built,
very sophisticated, and
you look at the Vedas
and the ancient Sanskrit and
the vermanas and all that,
and they talk about very
sophisticated things.
I think it's completely
conceivable that that happened.
Roughly 15,000 years
ago, supposedly there
was a battle between two cities,
Mohenjo and Harappa in India.
And they fought it out in
this huge cataclysmic war.
>>NOORY: Nukes.
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah.
I would argue today's kinetic
energy weapons, but yeah.
There are two different
schools of thought on that.
>>NOORY: They might
have even been
more advanced than we thought.
>>PHILLIPS: They
were more advanced.
And at the same time,
around 15,000 years ago,
you have this Black
Knight satellite that
shows up-- at the same time.
Now, conventionally, the
Black Knight, for example,
people believe that it
was actually like a probe.
But what if it wasn't?
What if it actually came
from Herappa or Mohenjo?
What if it actually
was a weapons platform
or if it was a ship
that they had built?
>>NOORY: It's supposed
to still be up there.
>>PHILLIPS: It is up there now.
>>NOORY: You do great
research, all open.
For people who
want to track what
you do, how do they find you?
>>PHILLIPS: Anomalies.net.
>>NOORY: That's
it, anomalies.net.
Olav, thanks for being
on "Beyond Belief."
>>PHILLIPS: Thank you very much.
>>NOORY: It's just
fascinating just
to imagine that past
civilizations might
have built structures and
walls or been to the moon.
It just makes you
think, doesn't it?
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[MUSIC PLAYING]